# Bank_Marketing
## Objective
The client would like to embark on a direct marketing campaign to increase bank revenues. To do that, they would like to understand what drives a customer to try new products and services, understand what drives the total new sales as well as the total number of new products and services purchased by customers. I was given a sample of data from which I was to build, validate, and test predictive models. My client required three models, one for each of the three variables they would like to predict to better help them target their direct marketing campaign. My client also wanted to see how my model performed against the test holdout dataset and will use the model’s performance on the test dataset for their long-term consulting relationships as well as to determine whose model will be deployed. I created several predictive and classification models to help my client and presented my findings. I believe this type of project will help me in my endeavors as a data scientist in the professional world outside of an academic setting. 

## Data
This data set consists of observations taken from account holders at a large financial services firm. The accounts represent consumers of home equity lines of credit, automobile loans, and other short- to medium-term credit instruments. The BANK data set contains the original data in its raw form. The target variables relate to whether that account holder purchased a new product from the bank in the past year. The data sets contain more than one million rows and 24 columns. The “dataset” column further identifies whether the observation is to be used for training (60% of the observations), validation (20%), and testing (20%). 
